---
layout: post
title:  Revenue Recognition in the Digital World 
---

*After trouble communicating the success of the iPhone, Steve Jobs helped change GAAP revenue recognition standards*

<!--excerpt--> 



Introducing the first iPhone, Steve Jobs made this observation: “Phone differentiation used to be about radios and antennas and things like that. We think, going forward, phone differentiation will be about software.”  It was a powerful insight.  

And yet the investing public was not won over.  They weren't won over by this vision (which rarely convinces public investors for long).  And they weren't convinced by brisk unit sales (500k iPhones were sold on the first weekend of availability).  Apple became one of the world's largest phone makers in the year after it entered the market.  But investors were not convinced.  Over the course of the 2008 fiscal year, Apple's stock declined to less than half its value before the iPhone launch in July 2007. 

We are used to thinking of the iPhone as one of the greatest product launches of all time but this view was slow to gain acceptance.  For Steve Jobs, it was another problem that needed to be solved for users.  This time, the users of the company's financial statements.

Apple's problem arose from a seemingly abstruse issue: the company’s revenue recognition policy for the new product.  As Apple's CFO explained at the time, "Since we will be periodically providing new software features to iPhone customers **free of charge**, we will use subscription accounting and recognize the revenue and product cost of goods sold associated with iPhone handset sales on a straight line basis over 24 months." 

From an accounting point of view, “free” is a concept that belongs somewhere else.  Marketing, for example.   Apple’s iPhone revenue policy intended to bring out the real economic meaning of “free” upgrades.  By [GAAP](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/gaap.asp) standards at the time, the provision of free upgrades in the future meant something.  It suggested that the company hadn’t completed the earning process when the iPhone device was initially purchased by an end user.  Instead, it meant that Apple had outstanding obligations to provide upgrades to users over the course of their estimated contract life of 2 years.

The policy, required by GAAP, meant that only a fraction of unit sales could appear in the company’s income statement in the period when they occurred.  These sales were instead piling up as deferred revenue on the balance sheet, casting an overly modest light on the iPhone’s unprecedented early progress.  The accounting policy made it harder for investors understand the emerging business at a critical juncture in Apple’s history.  It prevented the true story of the iPhone getting out.  It made it harder to make intelligent investment decisions.

So what did Steve Jobs do about the revenue reporting nighmare?  He did two things.  First, he presented non-GAAP revenue in a rare earnings call appearance, bringing attention to the limitations of GAAP subscription accounting in understanding iPhone revenue.  And secondly, he pressed Apple’s concerns with standards setting bodies, resulting in a change to US GAAP [known as the "Apple Rule"](https://cfo1.wordpress.com/2009/10/14/eitf-issue-09-3-certain-revenue-arrangements-that-include-software-elements-aka-the-apple-rule/).  

It is challenging to show the economics of what you are accomplishing with your digital products even now.  This is particularly true when software and hardware are bundled together, or when you give customers some kind of beneficial element for free.  

(Read more about Apple's early iPhone revenue recognition problems [here](https://appleinsider.com/articles/09/10/21/inside_apples_iphone_subscription_accounting_changes))
